you are not alive
okay
all right
hey I'm calling for nominations for
board chairman I'll make a motion to
appoint Keith Rutledge as chair
[Music]
vision for Keith Rutledge are there any
other nominations
as first nomination for board chairman
was Keith Rutledge I will now ask the
clerk of the board for a role for a roll
call vote for the first nominee
Brian
trustee Barnes
Department trustee Hall yes trustee
Rutledge yes yes
please State yay or nay
the first committee nomination for the
majority vote is will be elected
yes
majority vote in his elected board chair
and now having the meeting back over to
the board Sheriff please Rutledge
[Music]
so you're official
s
awesome I always wanted to do that
paperwork
all right
uh next door to business is to elect
Vice chairman uh do I have any
nominations for uh Vice chairman
okay uh
toy Rambo uh nominate Susan Brown are
there any other nominations
we have Margaret Hall are there any
other nominations
okay hearing none uh
um
we'll take a vote or take a we'll call
trustee Brown
trusty
um
Carlin
trustee Hall here
I'm here okay okay roll call vote
trustee Brown
yeah your name
or uh I'm sorry your vote
Vice chair
for myself
is that what you're asking yeah oh yes
okay uh for I'm sorry for trusty Brown
um
okay trustee Brown okay okay
and yay
so that's two
three no it's three um it will be okay
yes
I will switch with you
um
foreign
next we will appoint a treasure
um
chair
um I would like to appoint
Steffy Pavey as the treasure our
business manager
[Applause]
or I should say I would like a motion to
appoint trust uh Steffi pavia's business
manager is board Clerk or as Treasurer
okay
um second
okay all those in favor
okay the motion carries
um
Point board board clerk now this is a a
temporary assignment is that correct
um uh Mr chair I'd like to make the
motion to appoint Steffy Pavey as
interim board clerk as we resolved the
issue for board clerk okay
let her have a second wait a second okay
there's first and second to appoint
staffy baby as interim board Clerk and
so
um a new one is chosen all those in
favor say aye aye those opposed okay the
motion carries
uh okay trustees review and sign code of
ethics
um uh trust uh chair um Rutledge I would
ask that that these um the board clerk
um read that out loud for everyone to
hear the conflicts of of the code of
ethics for the board okay so noted
okay
you want me to read it or just put it up
on the screen um please I think it
should be read
um chair Brett Lynch so everyone can
hear it
okay
foreign
ethics for school board members as a
member of my local Board of Trustees I
will strive to improve public education
and to that end I will
as a member of our local Board of
Trustees I will strive to improve
student achievement and public education
and to that end I will
attend all regular scheduled board
meetings in so far as possible having
read my pocket ensuring that I am
informed about the issues to be
considered at the meeting
recognize that the board must comply
with the open meeting law and only have
authority to make decisions at official
board meetings
make all decisions based on the
available facts in my independent
judgment and refuse to surrender that
government to individuals for special
interest groups
understands that the board makes
decisions as a team individual board
members may not commit
the board to any action unless so
authorized by official board action
recognize that decisions are made by a
majority vote and the outcome should be
supported by all board members
acknowledge that policy decisions are in
primary function of the board and should
be made after full discussion at
publicly held board meetings recognizing
that authority to administer policy
threats with the superintendent
be open fair and honest no hidden
agendas and respective rights of other
board members to have opinions and ideas
which differ from mine
recognize that the superintendent is the
board's advisor and
should be present at all meetings except
when the board is considering the
superintendent's evaluation contractor
salary
understand the chain of commands and
refer problems or complaints to the
property Administrative Office over
building some Communications that may
create
condition the bias should a district
concern ever rise to the attention of
the board as a hearing panel
keep abreast of important developments
and educational Trends research and
practices by individual study and
through participation in programs
providing such information
respect the right of public the public
to be informed about District decisions
and school operations
understand that I will receive
information that is confidential and
cannot be shared
if staff are a second respect and
considerations use skills professional
employees and support the employment of
those best qualified teachers who
District
as found while insisting on regular and
impartial evaluation of all staff
present personal criticisms of District
Operations to the superintendent not to
District staff or to the board meetings
refuse
to use my board position for personal or
family gain or Prestige I will announce
any conflicts of interest before board
action is taken and remember always that
my first and greatest concern must be
the educational welfare of the students
attending the public schools
thank you
Pastor home machine
all right next we move to approved
signatories uh current signatories our
business manager accounts payable
uh superintendent and board chair
Mr chair I make a motion to approve the
signatories as listed okay any second
okay Mark chairman Hall
um I mean Chesapeake Rusty Hall
uh first and then who's second on testy
friend trusty Brown uh second or vice
group
okay
all those in favor say aye aye those
opposed
okay the motion carries
uh firm public records coordinator
custodian of Records
um someone want to bring that to the
floor uh
um I will bring that to the floor and I
will um
currently the custodian of Records is
our business affirm public records I
will make a motion to affirm the public
records coordinator and
um it is actually
um superintendent Branham who then
appoints um her representative and I
think it has been Steffi payby the
business manager okay
we need a second
okay
did you get that
um
Staffing okay
okay all goes in favor of uh firm public
records coordinator
um as stated by
um the trustee Hall please say hi hi
those opposed okay the motion carries
okay next on the agenda is to prove
meeting date schedule if I need a motion
I make a motion to approve um bring the
approval of the meeting data date
scheduled to the floor okay second
then okay
trustee Hall
um May the motion uh
um rainbow second
okay uh discussion
um
if that's what you watch what I want
okay okay
um
discussion on Flores do we leave the
regular meetings or typically scheduled
at 6 pm
and then with the May meeting right now
it has the the month of May meeting at
being at the Priest Lake Elementary
School and 6 p.m and then I would
um making an addendum to that amendment
to that motion that we actually create
the calendar which is what we missed
which we haven't done before for the
whole year and have it posted at the
locations that we decide where we're
going to post it and I'm looking for
that example but it's um it's right here
okay so that would be my second part of
it is that we actually do an official
notice of the meetings based on the
dates that we decide the locations and
the times and that it gets posted okay
so the motion on the floor is to keep
the meetings on the third Wednesday of
each month at 6 PM with uh the month of
May we meet at
Priest Lake Elementary and all the
meetings here at the district office
with the
exception of May and that we post the
total
the total
um monthly schedule
up front you do have a question yes
you have to have a December meeting
like Kobe do we do we are required to
have 12 monthly meetings or we're
supposed to have a business meeting
every month by code
and then if we shifted it to the week
before the like the 21st as it was an
issue this time if we switch it to the
week before then
and so that's when all the school
assemblies holiday programs are that
week and if we put ours at six we most
likely will be in conflict with a
holiday program
so that is why it's always kind of been
that other shifted a little to that week
that next week
to be able to so the community and the
trustees can attend the holidays and
Christmas programs that are being
offered at the schools
Resurrection
um we have a obligation as we have a
duty as elected officials to put our
elected officials our elected position
in front of us not our personal needs
and that's if we put it back then we're
in conflict with our with the holiday
programs
and I think it's more important for us
as a board to show our faces or be
present at the Holiday programs
okay
um this sounds like it's two
two motions okay first of all uh the
motion on the floor is to accept
the the
um
the schedule
we'll we'll do it we'll just do it two
ways
the motion
the motion on the floor is to accept the
schedule as written
with the exception of of December
okay we'll vote on December by itself so
all those in favor
of the schedule as noted with the
exception of December please say aye
okay those opposed
okay the motion carries now the second I
need someone to bring the second motion
to the floor as to what we we meet on in
December
foreign
yes
okay
trustee reinbolt makes a motion to
um uh
determine which which week we meet in
December
um
Vice chairman Brown second set so all
those in favor of leaving the meeting
the week of December 20th say aye
aye
those opposed say name
okay those in favor of moving it to the
week of what's the next week the 11th
11th moving it to the 11th sale it's
actually the 13th it's the week of the
11th but it would be on the 13th those
in favor of moving the December meeting
to December 13th say aye
we got another question what's that why
does it have to be on Wednesday because
it's just
it's looking if we found out what I mean
we had our meeting on the 11th say
I think it just
and that gives them the rest of the week
to do the Christmas programs and people
can get your face well
when do when are they gonna have their
Christmas day so that's going to be
probably towards the end of the week
okay
so
all those in favor of
having the meeting on Monday the 11th
say aye
aye
um I had a question though beforehand is
that going to cause any kind of problems
with our business manager and the bills
and everything if we're too early
because of the situation I wouldn't be
able to note them in extends at this
moment but there will be things
so that's a mute points moving it away
from the 20th is that not the problem
I would have to leave
okay couldn't tell yeah
and our week actually
um chair Rutledge yes our
no we don't have this is the 2023
Christmas calendar
um
yeah they haven't created it I just
wondering if we if it would be the week
you know if we could do it Monday the
18th to give a little bit more you know
time
if you want to do a Monday whether it be
Monday the 18th and then it would have
time to collect things because I'm just
trying to look at currently does that
cause a problem if it were the Monday
the 18th
okay
I do apologize
okay no that's fine sure I make a motion
that we
have it on the 18th of December okay
okay
there's a motion on the floor for the
18th of December
okay
is it first and the second all those in
favor say aye aye those opposed
okay the motion carries the December
meeting will be the 18th
next on the floor or or
um need to be brought to the floor is
approved location for posting notices
I need a motion to bring it to the floor
to make a motion to believe
okay trustee rainbow made a motion I
need a second a second
uh trustee Hall second
okay uh discussion
um our
our paper of record has been the Bonner
County daily b i i
by law I think we have to do that I know
that we have out of courtesy paid for a
subscription in the
um the beacon the river valley Beacon
but I think the record of um the
newspaper of record has to meet a
certain subscription and I don't know if
the daily b or the
um the river valley Beacon meets that
subscription that and so I'll make a
motion to have Bonner County daily be
our newspaper of record other sites be
courtesies
um
the beacon
um any postings on any reader boards
um live streaming or not live streaming
but any other
um I think any other places we um
put any other places we put that but we
do need to post it on the doors I think
it's the district office store
and I'm not sure where else so newspaper
of record would be the Bonner County
daily B
um and then our current postings of the
notifications on the doors that we are
currently doing it and the others would
be considered courtesy Okay so
the um
trustee Hall made a motion to post the
Bonner County on the Bonner County
district office and and um
the Bonner County daily B is our
newspaper of record do I have a second
okay
Ryan bolt second okay all those in favor
say aye aye those opposed okay the
motion carries
hey
uh next uh we need a motion to approve
site Council appointments
I'll make a motion to approve site
Council appointments okay trustee Hall
um make some motion second
reinvolt seconds okay current
appointments are Priest Lake Elementary
Margaret Hall
Priest River Elementary Susan Brown
Idaho Hill Elementary Carolyn Barton
Carlin Barton
Priest River Junior High Troy Reinbold
Priest River lamanna High School Keith
Rutledge are there any changes or
recommendations at this point
none okay all those in favor of keeping
up the way they are say aye aye those
opposed
okay the motion carries
okay approved board committee
appointments uh I'll make a motion to
bring that to the table to approve board
committee appointments trustee Hall make
some motion
um I trust you ramble seconds okay uh
discussion
um I'd like to make a motion to the for
the planet to spend the finance
committee at this time and if the
business manager and the superintendent
are good with it is to ins first suspend
our business committee meet committee
for a year and in place have a business
um work session as the interim because
we are working on the budget
okay
and and then I would also look at I
don't know I know that there's a
potential conflict of interest under
negotiations
with trustee Barton um I don't um that
don't know if that means that
I would go I would look at joining you
on the negotiations committee but we
also have meet and confer which could be
separated out it has been we are
required to have facilities and
maintenance Finance negotiations and
meet and confer by your policy okay so I
would be looking at separating those out
and maybe being Keith Rutledge and
Margaret Hall on negotiations meet and
confer could maybe be Carlin Barton and
Margaret hall and then
um curriculum committee would be Carlin
Barton and Susan Brown
okay
and then a transportation we may need to
look at Transportation committee
for transportation has a separate
director it should not be put under the
facilities and maintenance
um committee it's there's a facilities
and maintenance director and those two
actually should be separated the
question does our policy or uh
our policy allows for expansion yes it
does
um and it's
um
we expanded it with the curriculum with
appointments but I'll um
we can do an expansion and I'm trying to
see where it is in here but I did look
at it for an expansion if we needed to
and this is policy 1250 okay
so only the board has the authority to
solve advisory committee it has created
all communities should be reviewed and
renewed annually by the Board of
Trustees and we have
um
standing committees of the board may be
created their purpose is defined by a
majority of the board the board chair
shall appoint trustees to serve on the
communities board committee shall be
limited to less than one half of the
board okay perfect so okay so that means
this meets that requirement
s so the motion
on the table okay so
we need to fill out the Transportation
uh committee who would who wants to
serve on that
yeah
I'll put myself down as one
okay
and I don't know that was just I didn't
know if that worked for negotiations and
separating negotiations and meet and
confer out
um
just so there wouldn't be a conflict
with Jerry if you were on commitment
confer if um trustee Barton was on meet
and confer and not on negotiations and
it would separate bifurcate if
um that
relationship
does that
that was my recommend that's my bring
motion to the table is that a
combination
and the way we would want to say it is
that we were suspending the finance
committee in its place we will have
budget work sessions
so that would be the way that it would
be um
be specified do we have a second a
second though okay all those in favor
say aye aye those opposed
okay the motion carries as noted by by
trustee Hall
okay celebrations and delegations
do we make a motion to prevent the floor
it's not an action item okay
any celebrations or delegations
uh board member reports
um chair Rutledge I will give my board
member a report under four day school
week and at the research that I did
related to four day school weeks and the
interviews that I conducted of trust
other trustees around the state okay
perfect
um the only the report I would like
to to point out is I got to spend uh the
morning at the Priest River Elementary
with second graders and watched them
read it was it was awesome
um if no one's ever done that before
you have to do it it's great thank you
Mrs Hobel your kids were awesome and uh
to watch actually got to watch
two boys read for the first time
so that was that was incredible just to
be there for that and I scored points
with the girl with the pink glasses
because I knew baby shark
[Music]
and that's all I have
for that part
uh administrator directors reports
okay
[Music]
so we can be fast
I gave you a whole pile and she has
stuffed
so we won't go over everything
Elementary gets so much
thank you
everyone's awake now
I'm seriously lucky principal of Idaho
Elementary and Presley
Parker principal at preserver Elementary
the handout that I gave you the second
sheet under what it says Priest Lake
Elementary what I wanted to show you is
a sample of our reading benchmark
assessment and in January it is all
benchmarking assessment time to check
where our kids are so I give you a
sample I wanted you to speak that's a
reading fluency passes
for second graders and then if you flip
the page
so we the children we asked them to read
this is
um the assessment that we use the
students of fluency passage today
which is
and then that gives us a good idea of
therapy coming
here and then there's also a vocabulary
check that we do with the kids and the
comprehension so I just gave
just a few examples and then it gets
harder for the upper grade levels and
then the second if you flip through that
package until you go through a little
vocabulary then the next sheet you'll
see a grandma that greatest
and again our paper going through well
actually through third grade we hope to
have all of our kids master all of their
phonics skills so you'll see that at the
top of those columns all the different
phonics patterns beginning with letter
naming and sound and then it goes on the
short vowel sounds long vowel sounds all
of those things so that's the teacher
scoring sheet and then if you click the
page you'll see the what we call the
core phonics survey and so we check all
of the students with that the letter
sounds
and they on this assessment we if they
can't say it if it takes longer than
three seconds we know that they are
automatic yet
and that's what we're checking and then
if you go further you'll see nonsense
words
and real words and we ask students to
read those quickly
and that tells us if they are applying
the phonics patterns that we have taught
them
so it gets harder as you look down the
columns into multiple syllabic words
and
um we hope that all students have
mastered those skills by about the end
of third grade however I will tell you
that even our some of our fifth sixth
graders if they're not reading fluently
a lot of times it's a phonics issue and
so we use that to monitor
monitor them and help them grow and with
crime interventions to go with that
and then we also do math sense marketing
and writing benchmarking I didn't bring
a sample of
and then the other piece is that in
January we read to be made yourself so
that was the first sheet that I gave you
I just wanted to show you a sample of
our three elementaries we all have
expectation charts that we teach to
teach the children so that they know
what specific behaviors are expected and
you can see that we put every setting in
the building I think include taxes
around there is that correct yes and so
that helps our bus drivers and they're
having an issue with a child that isn't
probably major enough for them to be
kicked off the bus but they still need
some work then we can help support that
in the classroom
so we use those forms at all three
elementary schools to teach respectful
responsible behavior and then on the
flip side of that I just wanted to show
you
um what the tool that we use when a
child chooses to not follow the rules
and you can see we have the the
behaviors listed out into minor
behaviors and major behaviors and we
we use that as a tool for the kids I
have them actually find their behavior
on that farm and then tell me when it is
and then there are consequences that can
go along
with whatever has happened just like
parents do at home with their children
but this is very clear to our students
and then it's a very good guide that we
use with our teachers and then as well
with our parents so there's no guessing
on how we're going to handle problems or
behavior and then it helps us just teach
our kids how to do the right thing our
time
all right my turn okay all right so
taking that assessment data that maybe
um like Susie shared with you we do a
process called responsive intervention
and so we take the data and um we decide
if the students level one which is at
grade level including okay sometimes may
need a little bit of extra support here
and there but normally gets everything
between level two is um I need a little
more and there's a letter that goes from
parents letting them know what level
their child is and then there's level
three who needs intensive intervention
so level two is 60 minutes and I
um six you know 30 hours for the year
and then level three is 60
for the year so that's done with our
Title One
um era pros and our f-ser fun era Pro
and so we end our teaching staff and so
um kids that are on grade level often
during this intervention time will be
working on Independent work while we're
making small intervention groups for the
kids and what they need to be inner what
they need to actually support in and so
um and we find that data out by using
the assessment data that we get from
those assessments and then we also our
grade level teachers meet at my school I
have enough
available they meet every week most
children meet on Thursday for
collaborative groups to to also discuss
and what are we going to do and we also
have
um probably once a month from the grade
level a RTI meeting with a team and so
we find out if interventions aren't
working what's the next step what are we
going to do to help these kids and move
them forward and so you have that in
front of you also because I was so sick
in November I gave you a couple of
things I gave you in November board
report just to give you some I just I
had done it in November and didn't get
to come and bring it to you I gave you a
January board report and then I gave you
an amazing newsletter and it was amazing
to have Christmas program
literally and um so we also want to
thank the Priest Lake Nordic Club who
has hosted all of our Elementary School
fifth grade to go up to the lake and I
want to thank Priest Lake Elementary
School for hosting us and letting us see
our lunches in your cafeteria so it's a
very nice program
um we this year are going to get I think
our fifth graders two times and we're so
excited we have him we have the stuff we
have the boots the skis and everything
and it's just let's use it and get our
kids out there in the in the um
environment but
um the Nordic Club does an amazing job
they bring our shoes over to the to the
course they
um groom the courses all up that like
it's actually something I'm looking into
being myself now that I've done it with
Fifth Grade last year so it's pretty
amazing and I want to thank them another
excites me really quick is um Priest
River build our Tower again with our
Spartan bucks and we are having free
popcorn according from our PTO and hat
day tomorrow so exciting
things
um
any other
app
s
sorry I was hiding in the machiner's
office
not George principle of the preacher
Eastern High School
um just a quick couple quick updates
um with the loss of our student this
past weekend
um things have been pretty tough High
School last couple days
I just wanted to uh let the board know
and when I'm president thank you for
your thoughts and prayers with our staff
students and family we really appreciate
that
um what an amazing staff I've uh
opportunity to work for
students were in classrooms uh be kept
moving forward or given to our students
from our teachers was incredible
um the way our staff came together for
each other was also incredible without
the shamer and our crisis team and our
counselors have it not been possible we
had members of allergies in the
community uh Community other community
organizations providing counseling help
for our students and staff every single
staff member at the high school also
provided a at least a close check-in
minus tomorrow on Friday but so but we
are moving forward
appreciate
all the all the support from our
community
um
quick update on on academics interim
data is is has has come in finally in
map and language arts we are at or above
the state average at all grade levels it
varies by grade level we are just if
we're not if we're not at the state
average we're right there below
um some grade levels are above the state
average science is one of the only
school that took it so we already
um that's a little disappointing that
we're the only I mean it's good for us
that we're actually using that tool
um you know hats off to our to our
teachers that to be opportunity to use
the tool provided in the state but it's
also disappointing and you can't compare
yourself to the districts across the
state as well
um and on a positive note we had uh the
first annual Battle of the Border
against our rival the Grizzlies across
the state line and reboot them both in
basketball and with the spirit
competition so go as far as on that one
so again thank you to everyone at the
beginning providing support for our
students stuff and and family so
appreciate it thank you thank you
that's it okay
uh superintendent report
review
player no
okay
thank you for being here I didn't get to
get to this if you came to the community
Forum on Wednesday
my time ran very short and I did not get
to talk about the Strategic plan
um I needed to get Mr Lambert on stage I
told him we pressed for 6 30 and I think
it was like close to quarter to seven
I'm like okay
maintenance really short so it was very
very brief but I'm glad you're here I
will also be presenting this in full
detail within complete leadership team
taking turns to present this plan to the
community
and complete with a budget
um
after meeting after meeting after
meeting after meeting with many many
community members and staff and the
leaders we came up with a conclusion
from uh different resources that we
definitely needed a systemic way of
performing within the district we we
strive no longer to be segmented in our
school schools that we are all working
together in a coordinated fashion
um the way that we're going to make a
huge difference on our performance
impact is to work in tandem with one
another
so this is a nice uh
was brought by principal Parker from
Priest River Elementary she did a great
job of Designing this for us and it
looks very nice so I compliment her it
has our mission statement our vision and
then the eight Kings of Excellence that
we will be bringing to you via Quantum
learning
together
okay the purpose the purpose of the bus
Barnard County
2023-28 strategic plan gives us the road
map towards take our district on a
journey towards academic Excellence to
do this it requires all team members
internal stakeholders and Community
Partners to get on board as we Embark
upon this journey together every member
of our school district has the capacity
to eliminate disparities and embrace our
Pathway to educational excellence we
know that the time is now to act with a
sense of urgency and the desire to
ensure that our graduates our College
and Career ready for the expectations of
the 21st Century to accomplish this we
must ensure that our students are
consistently at the center of our work
decision making and Mission it is
through Collective and focused energy
that we will feel the whole system
the whole system transformation meaning
the good of all of our students this
plan will therefore keep us on track
towards achieving our specific
action-oriented vision of success in a
time when it is all too easy to get
distracted by today's politicized
culture War
we invite you to join us on our pursuit
to strive for greatness by reading
through internalizing and envisioning
the compelling future that this
strategic plan will bring we believe it
provides us all with a better
understanding of our challenges and
opportunities our core commitments and
purpose and makes clear the urgency of
our work in key priority areas in order
to stay on track on behalf of the entire
West modern counties team
I invite you to join us as we Embark
upon this incredible opportunity when we
are still as you can see we're still
putting together
to the things this is a drought this
will be posted tomorrow on the West
Bonner County School District
web page so you can go through and read
this in its entirety
point of action of this plan the
Strategic plan is based upon a theory of
action best structured as an if then
statement our plan of action connects
the goals and objectives to specific
strategies and outcome measures it's how
we create change and ensure that
students will achieve when all
stakeholders work together and we are
clear about who does what and why in The
District the graphic below shows the
plan of action implementation
if we Define the district strategic
intent set the organization's Direction
coherently organize the system provide
the roadmap to do so then leaders and
teachers will have the necessary
knowledge and tools to improve learning
for all students resulting in
educational Excellence across all five
schools who and what informed the
Strategic plan the sources
we did interviews observations
questionnaires data analysis slots
strength weaknesses opportunities and
threats 3C meetings listening tours
documents administrators board members
staff community members teachers
students and parents
the plan is organized
like this
the Strategic plan is organized around
six specific areas we call these pillars
the first one being instruction and
learning the second one Communications
the third one culture and climate
fourth Technologies fifth transportation
and six facilities in each area specific
strategies have been identified along
with action steps that will guide
implementation of this plan and make the
district stronger in a specific area our
goal will be to initiate the action
steps according to the timeline set
board for the Strategic plan near the
end of the year we will begin evaluating
our progress and making changes where
needed such evaluation and action
therefore will allow us to update each
of the six areas and realign action
steps to reset the plan to sustain the
next success in five years this will
provide for a continuous five-year
Direction
the Strategic operating plan will be
closely monitored by the administration
in the school board during each year of
implementation the Strategic operating
plan is a document that sets priorities
and will give our school district a
clear Direction over a Continuum of five
years as we focus on these priority
areas it will be very exciting to work
with staff parents students and
Community to make this plan become a
reality even more exciting is the impact
that the Strategic plan will have on our
students education in the west Monterey
County School
s so for the first pillar which is
instruction and learning we have chosen
the anchor to be Quantum learning
Quantum learning is not a curriculum
Quantum learning is how we are asserting
instruction and this this program will
bring continuity starting in
kindergarten and follow through all the
way to the 12th grade so that we are
using strategies that are the same from
year to year to year very exciting
strategies that will be implemented in
the classroom
utilized so that kids can expect certain
things from kindergarten all the way
through 12th grade that being a
character education program called The
Eight Keys of Excellence it also
provides strategies that helps kids
remember certain things a lot of music
is Incorporated in Quantum learning
um teachers are shown how to use a
plethora of teacher tools that will help
kids with different learning styles
kinesthetics oral all of the visual
there's all the senses that are involved
in teaching directly to how kids learn
best
um I can give you an example that
especially at the elementary level a lot
of music is units we have an entry
strategy where children come in they're
reading
music is playing
um they're welcomed and when the music
starts to fake they know that it's time
to sit down and then they have a they'll
the teacher will come to the front or
wherever the teacher is at the time
simply repeat that and then they use
this thing called the whoosh the whoosh
thing to congratulate everybody in the
class so they will choose once did once
that starts the class the kids will turn
around and they'll select anyone in the
room and they go whoosh
and they'll point to one certain student
maybe somebody was having a hard day
they knew that somebody came in had a
different problems so they're
recognizing each individual and even
during the class when a teacher asks hey
let's see if so-and-so whoosh because
they answered a question this kid might
have never answered a question today in
his life but we we drug into the quote
we we got him out there and he answered
a question let's give him a whoosh
so everyone is recognized it's a
constant interaction and engaging way to
teach where kids get excited and they're
always commended and they're always
congratulated for their efforts
um it's just a very dynamic system and I
I could go on about it all and be long
they wrote the thing that you will see
tomorrow when you go online you can you
can you can learn all about Quantum
learning it's got the descriptions
it's got the Eight Keys of Excellence
that are heavily used to create
character build character those are
Integrity failure leads to success
speak with good purpose
this is it make the most of every moment
commitment make your dreams happen
ownership
flexibility
balance
and then the final page talks about each
of the uh each of the pillars or the
pillar for instruction and learning and
how this becomes the anchor this takes
you through how the teacher what the
teachers will be taken through in um
their training this coming August we
have a trainer coming she'll be working
with the elementary teachers for two and
a half days and then she will be working
with the junior high and the high school
teachers for two and a half days and
this will this pretty much identifies
what those teachers will be learning and
doing during that instruction
these are the performance indicators
that we use at West Water County Schools
the assessments that the kids are taking
taken through a lot of those are well
some of those are achievement tests the
ones that the state use are the ISAT and
the iri
those show achievement gains and those
are the ones that we don't always like
but they're what the state uses so
instead of you know complaining about
them we're just going to rough it
through we're gonna White Knuckle those
poor kids through those tests we're
gonna hopefully see results with all of
this good stuff that we're doing
together and then the other ones they're
some of the ones that we do use our
screeners um but the ones that we're
gonna be focusing on on this thing are
the ones that the state are going to
hold our feet to
and that would be the ice atom and the
iri
West Monterey County School District
goals these goals are aligned to each of
the pillars
and with the pillars there are six
pillars and therefore there are six
goals that each pillar is designed to
meet
the evaluation of the district goals
District goals will be strategically
tied to the annual goals for the
superintendent myself
principals and teachers each September
measurable objectives which are
different than the goals measurable
objectives are the ones that we say what
we're going to do and how we're going to
improve performance
um
so in September measurable objectives
and outcomes will be devised in a
concerted effort between by the
leadership team and teachers together
further the outcomes and objectives will
by Design these systemically coordinated
so that all persons will be working in
tandem to reach the overall 14 goals of
a district
annually measurable objectives and
outcomes will be presented to the West
Bonner County School Board of during the
first board meeting in September
the outcomes will be evaluated by all
stakeholders each spring evaluation
results will be will determine our
course of action and the roadmap for the
next year
so these are the charts that we have
developed for student achievement this
is the istan and the irr stores and
we're waiting until this spring when we
get our new results in and that's when
we will get together in the fall the
teachers and the leadership team will
will set targets for these different
areas we're showing that showing our
achievement
we will devise our objectives that say
by the screen of the following year we
want to show this much gain in each of
these areas per grade level and those
will become our targets
Okay so
he didn't put I don't see that the
spreadsheets is there another page for
this for the spreadsheets
okay I don't know if you can begin with
that
like on the purple pillar yeah okay so
each of the pillars starting the
instruction and learning how they
spreadsheet and each spreadsheet shows
the action steps that the team will be
with the teachers and it's a hard
Arrangement you'll get a copy of this
um the action steps that we will be
taking and how we will monitor progress
and the responsible person or groups who
will be carrying out each of these
action steps
so this is what we will be doing
together in our work sessions
so we have teaching and learning
you see there's a lot
we have communications
we have school environment and school
climate
technology
Transportation you can see where we're
getting a late start on Maryland because
of all of the troubles that we have but
Daryl's doing a good job of getting
ready for all of the moves that we're
making for transportation
and we have facilities and improvements
in capital renewal
now that's a very interesting point of
all these spreadsheets is for the
community use we are right now in the
middle of devising budget sheets for
each of these
each of these spreadsheets so
introduction and learning on the back
will have its own budget spreadsheet so
that the community can come and see
where your tax dollars are going and how
exactly they're being spent
we will have then a budget spreadsheet
for communications
one for culture and climate one for
Technologies one's for transportation
and for facilities
so anytime any interested Community
member wants to go to that plan on the
website or you want a hard copy you can
come to the district and get a hard copy
you can see the budget for each of those
and how the moneys are being spent
now
you should know that one-third of our
budget relies on a supplemental Levy
and it is critical and I'm telling you
it is critical that we don't have the
rug pulled out from under our feet at
this time
supporting the school district right now
is is crucial probably more than ever
because we have a wonderful opportunity
and we have a guaranteed direction that
we are going and that we promise that we
will be following that you can track our
progress
so I am asking for support
um
in keeping our
keeping our budget going and supporting
our Levy the let the things that we are
not able to afford with our general
budget that we are going to propose a a
levy four will be attached to each of
the budgets it will show what the levy
dollars are going to be targeting and
what they'll be used for
that internisms use the five-year
strategic plan thank you
thank you Jackie
okay at this time uh we need a financial
update from treasury report business
manager baby
are there any questions
not at this time
okay
there's no question okay
next we move to the comments from the
audience
um
okay uh first up is Paul Turco
yes please
before I begin uh thank you guys very
much for what you do it's not an easy
job it's not an easy task
um
please take this switch
out of respect and concern
hello my name is Paul Turco my wife
Jessica and I have a second and fourth
grader at Priest River Elementary
I have a responsibility to stand here
tonight to give my opinion I'm the only
one who can give my opinion and I'm not
sure to be shared by others but I think
it may be
I have a responsibility for my two
students to do what I think as well
your decisions are for the entire
district and therefore agreeably more
important to make the right one
part of the reason I'm not sure and
probably share my opinion is because the
survey results have not been shared
tonight's agenda states that there will
be a vote on a four-day school schedule
and transportation
how does a community come together if
they're divided by the unknown
I believe a lot of our decisions have
been based off the fear of the unknown
and quite frankly have become quite
hypocritical let me explain
we hear a labeling because it is
unfamiliar we are scared of it we want
to eliminate it make it not allowed or
not on my watch
some other examples of things have been
eliminated from schools of God that has
not worked out well
then when I was in school there was a
dare program to eliminate drugs from
schools but we still have students
getting an education of those on the
streets
we have tried to eliminate guns from
school if we have more school shootings
than any other country
the point I'm trying to make is that by
trying to eliminate something from our
schools it can backfiring the exact
opposite of what it desire is achieved
hypocrisy is when another label like one
learning is promoted
it is about getting out of our comfort
zone and it's using its expressed as a
positive
I really like a lot of the principles of
quantum learning I feel they're very
valid and can be very beneficial
but wouldn't be unfamiliar and getting
out of our comfort zone
be adopting some of these unfamiliar
labels
it may seem like I'm talking more about
curriculum and not the four-day work
schedule but doesn't it make more sense
to pick a curriculum before limiting our
options
American classic classical education
sounds great so it's a five-day
curriculum and it was for a three
through six districts
I have about half a page left you know
would you allow me to continue please
that's your call we need a preface
probably next time that it's too um
to get more involved and we must get
more involved and do more when hypocrisy
comes when we put our time money
resources towards it and it seemingly
pushed under the rug and not consider
Ed there should be a give and take not a
voice that comes off louder than the
rest this is not leadership it's
bullying
we need more buy-in from this community
and that has to be done with giving us
the information
making decisions behind closed doors
isn't fulfilling the responsibilities
all of these curriculums have the golden
rule in common treat others the way you
wish to be treated
in all that validity and the truth is
there is no easy button and not one is
going to work is going to say compromise
and a blaming of them to make it work
our students will not know right from
wrong
if we are in a battle of diversity
people good will not win if you pretend
that evil does not exist give our
students and staff the right tools to do
good right decision is not taking and
limiting to a four additional schedule
the right decision is not to eliminate
local jobs for our communities because
it needs to work together the right
decisions on both of these votes tonight
or no
The Five-Year Plan sounds great as long
as we don't sabotage it in Year One
thank you very much
okay next up is Daisy uh Schneider
thank you
everybody I also have two or three kids
in elementary school and I am against
the four day school week because I sort
of lived there when I was in high school
I was in trade school so we have many
days
7 30
so before five o'clock we all have
fallen asleep in class we all have lost
focus and then when you come home you
don't feel like doing your homework or
you don't have time to have any kind of
social life so it was very hard going
through this and I don't want my kids to
go through the same thing and like you
can ask most of the kids what is their
favorite part about school and a lot of
them will say it's PE and recess and
there's a reason behind it because that
gives them a break of just the hard
stuff they have to go through every day
and learn and read and all that stuff
and my kids had the privilege to attend
the little preschool in town where their
teacher had very short days with them
but in that short time she was able to
teach them more that they could learn in
school so my four-year-old could read
and now in kindergarten he's doing stuff
that his brothers in second and third
and fourth grade are doing and and he's
just excellent just because yeah those
short days they're short and fun and he
had the energy when he came home to do a
little extra work and read and now the
kids have the incentive to read 10 hours
to Learn to Earn Silverwood tickets and
it's a struggle because they come home
they're exhausted they gotta read and
then they have sports practices or games
to go to and it just calls for a really
long days
this is just my opinion and my
experience okay thank you
okay
next up Haley Scott
hi I'm Haley Scott again I'm a lifetime
member uh Priest River and proud to say
so I'm also the mother of two children
who are current
students at Priest River Elementary
coming up
um I want to take this opportunity
really quickly to just thank the
teachers at our elementary bare minimum
because that's the only experience I
have so far
um my girls are Polar Opposites one of
them is on The Struggle Bus to success
and we are pushing through and we are
trying our hardest
but the two teachers that she has had
um have both committed to her and given
their very best and I appreciate that to
the ends of the Earth
I have sat in multiple meetings for
hours on end with them trying to figure
out what to do to best help her succeed
and without
without Mrs McConnell and Mrs hughal
Ryan wouldn't be where she is right now
and um I just really am appreciative of
that my other daughter on the other hand
humble brag is a pretty bright Little
Star uh she's a kindergartner but early
on in the school year uh her teacher Mrs
Pettit recognized that Blake was doing
great things and had potential for that
she was on the phone with me quickly
saying hey I think we need to push her
harder so she immediately moved her up
into a first grade class during reading
and corrected that curriculum and I
appreciate both of those ends of that
Spectrum so much because they're able to
identify my kids needs and my kids
strengths and then address them without
the support of those teachers I wouldn't
have the skills and the resources to do
all of those things I like that they
think I'm a good mom and I'm doing my
best but without them we'd be lost so
thank you to the teachers of our
district
secondarily
um I want to address the four day school
week
and I want to just recall our attention
to the presentation from last Wednesday
we as a district
I may stand corrected but we are
actively looking at
making a change to a new curriculum and
in that presentation Steve Lambert
stated that a four day week could not be
conducive to the classical educational
model
given that knowledge that a four day
week would not be conducive to that
curriculum I think it's best that we
hesitate on our decision tonight and
wait until we choose a curriculum
thank you thank you
okay next up is um
is it Darcy is it Douglas oh
Dana sorry
[Music]
hi I'm Dana Douglas
um I am a member of the community for
over 35 years I had two kids went
through and now I have three grand
babies on their way so um
I didn't plan on speaking today I
thought I knew this was going on but
quick I felt compelled to get here I
really really want to make sure that
this board understands that we have a
very diverse
population of children
I'm not here for my kids I'm not here
for my grandbabies I'm here for those
kids that can't speak for themselves I'm
here for those kids that if you take a
day away from them they may be sitting
in a cool house I'm here for the kid
that if you take a day from their weeks
they may not get food I'm here for the
kid
that will sit at home alone
and not have any interaction
that's why I'm here
four day week doesn't doesn't affect my
family or my grandbabies because I have
a warm home and I have food in the
cupboard and they will be loved and they
will be nurtured but it affects my
neighbor's kids it affects your kids and
it affects their kids we are a community
we stand together and we do what is
right and what is best for the Youth and
the children of this community if you
don't want to do what's best for our
kids you shouldn't be sitting on this
board
because you have an obligation to do
what's best I was on the committee that
went and researched four days School
weeks many years ago not one not one
education or
teacher not one said it was better for
the students you will get a sub standard
education you will not be able to do the
same curriculums you can't fit it in
I think the other thing you forget is
how big our district is from point A to
point B
putting those kids on the bus is too
long I just really would like you guys
to remember this is about everyone's
kids thank you
okay
next up Steve Hurst
I'd actually like to say over here so
that I can see you guys and even see me
because I'd like to address the board
not the community well we need to uh
pick it up on a mic so we can because
it's live
did my two minutes start already no no
no no no no no no
no it's not
the last school board concern was raised
regarding the lack of input from
regarding the four day week excuse me
could you uh take your name for the
record see first okay thank you
as a graduate from priest triple Mana
high school that held a steady job
during most of my high school career I
feel like you were you were doing these
students at this service by not taking
their opinion into consideration many of
them are already balancing real adult
responsibilities while also attending
school
it was also stated at that meeting that
students would receive a survey I've
checked our high school students school
email with them multiple times and still
have not received anything regarding the
four day week
if you want to get a real feel for
actually what's going on in our schools
you need to listen to Educators parents
and students
not the outspoken majority or minority
excuse me that never stepped foot in our
schools except to attend school board
meetings and hold signs
another concern I have is regarding
Contracting our buses as a business
owner I'm baffled that you are still
considering this
we all know that when our buses are sold
and the contract's up the price is going
to increase at that point we will not
have the funds to buy a fleet of buses
one last thing I would like to touch on
and this is mostly why I wanted to stand
in front of you guys
um it's something the superintendent
said in the last three C's meeting
as someone who attended kindergarten
through her senior year in the district
in a fourth generation three-steriver
resident I about fell out of my chair
when she said quote our teachers need an
attitude adjustment unquote I feel that
was very unprofessional and an
embarrassment to our district I'd like
to publicly thank each and every one of
our teachers many of them are here
tonight and I thank them with all my
heart for doing the very best for our
children I thank you I appreciate you I
know so many of us appreciate you and
thank you for sticking with our great
little community and putting up with the
superintendent and the school board who
do not support you
okay next up Hannah Hurst
my name is Hannah Hurst and I'm speaking
regarding the presentation that Steve
Lambert gave on American classical
education which will tie into sporting
week and I have no doubt that this
curriculum is working great in his
charter school he showed some excellent
numbers on how it is making live effect
on the students please keep in mind that
these students these parents are
choosing this school but there are other
public school options available in their
area he also made it very clear that
parental involvement is key to that
curriculum working my husband and I have
two kids in the district they started
here in kindergarten are now in seventh
and 10th ninth grade we have spent
countless hours volunteering in school
everything from Reading kids helping
with math testing and small groups
copying for the teachers helping the
class
we have also attended every single
parent-teacher conference I'm here to
tell you that any parent who wants to be
involved is already involved if they
want to volunteer help in class help
with their child's homework they already
are implementing a curriculum that
requires more parental involvement will
not bring more parents to the school to
be involved he also made it clear that
this curriculum should not be
implemented with students over seventh
grade he said that the charter school he
helped setup lost half their eighth
graders in the first year so what
happens to my eighth grade and next year
and my 10th grader next year what
curriculum will they be using also what
about families who are moving to the
district if a junior in high school
moves in they're doomed to fail with the
curriculum that will work for him
according to Steve Lambert the expert on
this curriculum because they did not
start at an elementary school there's no
other public option in this District
by adding that curriculum any new family
would have to struggle through a
curriculum that's not recommended for
their child during the meeting where the
board voted to resend the last
curriculum trustee Brown specifically
stated that one of her reasons to resend
it was the difficulty in an already
struggling District this American
classical education seemed very much
more difficult according to Steve
Lambert than the one that they had sent
back also the board is moving very
quickly to switch to the Florida AV
that curriculum was he was adamant that
that would not work with the four day
week if the district is planning on this
40 week that curriculum needs to be
removed entirely from the consideration
if you can see through the flashy
presentation the Flying Flags the
patriotic songs and the pictures you've
painted of an educational Utopia I'm
sure you can see that that curriculum is
not suited for a public school district
in which there are no other private
school options thank you
okay next up Annie McMahon
this man
hi I'm Annie McMahon I grew up in this
community or I was born in Newport
brought home to the home my mother was
racing they moved to preserver uh when
she was about seven years old long time
Community member I had two children in
this district and I'm a teacher but
that's not why I'm here my third grader
and seventh grader need me to be here I
understand the reason for the four day
work week we've got some things we need
to be able to do as Educators we need to
learn Quantum learning we need to have
time for our district meetings but don't
kick up from 3 30 to 5. I did a little
bit of that and currently we have three
in-service days in our district we have
one coming up in February we have one in
Maine we have one in October if we have
an in-service day a month that's nine
days if part of that time's Quantum
learning and the other half is meetings
it would work I looked at my kids
schedules 168 day school day currently
that's what it says on our calendar
minus the six extra days we would need
four those meetings would be
162-day school day then I said well kids
go to school Ali Goes to School my third
grader for me to 2 25 and
168 days how many hours is that for the
state doesn't work an hour do they work
in crazy minutes for whatever reason
comes up something like 64
um some odd minutes well if you took
those same exact minutes and divided it
over 162 days it's adding about 15 to 20
minutes onto our current school day that
would mean once a month one Friday a
month designated for Quantum learning
and our meetings could happen without
taking a wrecking ball to the current
system
it was also brought up that our
maintenance could do more maintenance
during that Friday time so that got me
thinking well this maintenance always
have to work their work their time our
kids
can't they come at three o'clock and
work from 2 30 or 3 o'clock later into
the evening why do we have to get up
that Friday just wondering wondering
thank you for it okay thank you
okay with that
um the rest of these are
these are non-agenda items
bring those up later okay next uh I need
a motion to bring to the floor consent
agenda I'll make a motion to bring the
consent agenda to the floor okay to uh
trustee Hall uh mix emotion in seconds
okay uh trustee Barton seconds
okay
um
discussion
none at this time okay uh approve the
minutes of the previous meetings
yeah it's usually a little packet all at
once
incent agendas the whole thing okay
I make a motion to approve the consent
agenda with the minutes Bills new hires
and resignations okay
all those in favor say aye
aye those opposed
okay the motion carries
okay moving on to Old business
we have
um
uh
policy reading
a second reading uh I need a motion to
bring that to the floor
I'll make a motion to bring the second
reading of policy 3518 treatment of
opioid overdose overdoses to the floor
okay trusty Hall make some motion do I
hear a second awesome okay trustee
Barton seconds
okay discussion
[Music]
um
chair Rutledge what the one comment that
I have is I think we can delete
um the note that says this policy is
only intended for the school districts
with a school nurse Etc
um which is in bold at the top the other
part is
um I would make a motion to accept the
other
um the policy the second reading of the
policy as is except with that revision
okay
any other comments
okay those in favor or do I hear a
second for uh trustee Hall's motion
okay
trustee Barton second all those in favor
say aye aye those opposed
you play the motion carries
thank you
okay uh action item uh decision
recording the transportation options do
I hear a motion to bring it to the floor
I'll make a motion to bring the decision
regarding Transportation options to the
floor okay trustee Hall makes a motion
to bring it to the floor do I hear a
second
okay trustee Vice chairman Brown makes a
motion to bring it to the floor for
seconds
discussion
um I think it's do you have a um
chair Rutledge do you have a report to
give on this one yes um there are
currently
three options uh in front of us
um the first option is to keep what we
have intact with the addition not only
do we have a director of Transportation
but
um we would also have a dispatch and a
um
um what was the other thing
mechanic mechanic thank you because in
the past one person has filled all three
slots
um and that caused
um that that is a un
um
sustainable uh condition we're we have a
single point of failure with one person
so the first option is to keep our
current Bus
Transportation uh
um Department intact with the addition
of two additional
um people the second option
is to keep the
um Bus Barn intact and Outsource the
driving
okay to fill to fill vacancies
um and the third option is to Outsource
all of all of the bus
um
operations to an outside supplier
so that are the three options that we
are considering tonight any other
comments
question of clarification you said on
number two Outsourcing the driving or in
filling in the drivers that we don't
fill it
I misspoke it would be filling in holes
with the drivers
so we can
correct
we would hire in that one we would hire
our own but then fill in the drivers
with Outsourcing the same as it is right
now except that we get substitute
drivers from whoever
until we can fill the spots okay right
and
um in addition to our comments um
Jacob Iverson here is here from harlows
would you care to speak at this time
thank you
searching
that is a bright light
good evening my name is Jacob Iverson
I'm a Bonner County resident
thank you Bourne his superintendent for
the opportunity to speak tonight
Carlos is glad that we've been able to
support the school district in a time of
need she provides stability and
transportation
as well as resources and other
components that help continue the
transportation plan today
change is difficult
change is always difficult to hear about
that
in the spirit of continuous Improvement
stability of the transportation is key
for any school district you provide
resources and support not just through
the homeless school activity home to
school transportation but also through
field trips and activities
Outsourcing student transportation
provides many benefits which are
sometimes quantifiable when some are not
quite realized to the public and outside
fact contractors in Idaho transferred
over 65 percent of students in the state
of Idaho today
one of the key things of trying to
measure the balance between Outsourcing
or keeping something internally is
understanding the total cost of
operations to properly compare
I would ask you to use the cost analysis
tool to spend recognized by a federally
and used within the state of Idaho to
understand the true cost there's costs
such as insurance
there's cost such as vehicle and
buildings benefits which includes inside
and outside which is work comp
payroll work HR work training and
compliance entry-level driver training
which is federally required as well as
adopted by the state of Idaho
and department of education requirements
for facilities administrative costs and
HR and many more things
there are different models and I ask you
to make sure you take a full
understanding of what those are
as a senior vice president of the
company
I understand that there are full TurnKey
as an option there's also these driver
options that you can Outsource that as
people transition there's also you can
retain that in-house
I would ask again to please understand
the total cost of operation
I know that there was a couple bids that
came in for that and I was pleased to
say that Carlos been in my comparisons
was the best solution for the school
districts some of those benefits I'll
highlight
10 million dollars of insurance for
protection of the school district as a
whole
purchase of equipment there's been
concerns I've heard about that in the
past experimental values may also be
provided
detailed
inside asset to help you improve the
status of those equipment
we're willing to purchase the parts stop
supplies tooling we invested willing to
invest over thirty thousand dollars to
do that
really need to have is a radial repeater
to improve your Communication System
throughout your network your school
district is very large every couple
people talk about that you need to have
communication with your buses when
you're transporting those areas and we
would be doing that
the concern about employees currently we
worked a couple different models we've
had that through sustained and
grandfathered in current employees and
we've transitioned employees in school
districts but we've also going to the
other ways create a transition
incentives and then help offset the
benefits that they're receiving from the
school district with increased wages
since that's close to eight dollars an
hour
for Operational Support I'm glad to hear
that you're looking at the options of
trying to have a transportation leader
call the title that she likes you if
dispatcher or another County it's very
important to have that some of the
benefits of Harlow status is a dedicated
recruiter safety manager teacher manager
you're much more that can benefit the
school district
yeah you cannot go with the Contracting
or some type of hybrid I would strongly
encourage you to look at your model and
your plan to see what's best one of the
things that Contracting you can add back
service you can add that routes if
you're not 16 rounds you were down to 10
when we were at one time we were down to
10 I think you're at 12 now we've been
able to help I think you can add back a
liquid route which improves service and
also additional resources to support
field trips and activities
you've not been able to do that I live
in the camera I also associate Sports
and I do give back
under Idaho 67 2806 procuring the
services we followed all those
requirements we followed all those two
different supplements the school
district and the board I applied you for
making sure you take the right protocols
towards that
one of the things of Outsourcing partial
Services it gives additional
transportation services as needed or if
needed as well as
vehicle support maintenance services and
also Transportation knowledge and
solutions I can tell you that I sit on
Idaho Board and different pieces and
transportation models
I believe in the transportation it's
blood into my body I like it please be
different yo but I do believe it you're
up to a tough decision tonight but I
would ask you if you please make sure
you understand total cost of operations
because there are a lot of hidden costs
and take your time
thank you very much and I'll be
available
thank you um next we have our interim
Transportation director
did you wanna did you want to comment
okay perfect
okay any other questions
not at this time okay
all right so
we we have three options in front of us
keep keep what we have and and
um
um employ a a dispatcher and a mechanic
with a with a
director
um
I asked for a motion on the floor for
that
um
I was gonna see if I would
if you would make I was going to make a
motion for um I was going to bring a
motion to the floor for um
for the director mechanic and dispatcher
but to figure out the budget for that
because if we just go put the motion out
there we do need to know what the budget
is going to look no I should
back pedal on that
but I would say that I would look at I
guess further understanding
um just in case we don't have enough
substitute bus drivers I would be
interested in that going with option one
but
um filling in if we needed substitute
bus drivers maybe from that would be
option two yeah so maybe a hybrid I
would make a motion to make a hybrid but
we need the numbers on the director
mechanic and dispatcher okay okay so the
motion on the tape on the table is to go
with option two
which would be a hybrid with with
subcontract
um drivers filling in the routes
and
um
[Music]
maybe I would look at having his pencil
out those numbers and then do the final
approval once we get all those numbers
yes yes that's what I would look at is
put that on the table that would be my I
would like that option my motion is for
option two but to add to it that we
would like I would like to see the
budget that goes along with that okay
certain okay is that clear to everyone
yes it is okay that's a it's a good
compromise okay all those in favor
aye aye those opposed
okay the motion carries we'll go with
option two
okay and I I just want to you know just
wanted to thank Carlos for the effort
and time that they've um they've
supported us um to get us through this
Crunch and also take the time to put the
RFP together the proposal together
I mean that was greatly helpful I agree
thank you Jacob
okay
yes yes
yes sir I mean yeah
I can speak to the board when I'm that
way our emergency contract has expired
and so right now they're exposed to both
of us
remake do you understand what that looks
like from 42-year passing of option two
make sure you stay in compliance of the
purchasing of services I did my own
research for that there's a way for that
and you have a copy of the code for you
tonight that I can provide to you for
but there are processes you have to do
for that because we do have currently
three drivers working for you okay
even make sure that they are taken care
of what that looks like through the end
of the school year because that could
cause um
destruction in your current status okay
thank you very much
okay
next up decision regarding four day
school week do I have a motion to bring
it to the floor
um make a motion to bring it to the
floor okay trustee Hall regarding four
day uh
school week to four so I have a second
a second trustee or vice chairman Jesse
Brown our Brown makes a second
discussion
um
I like the report together
um several different school districts
there are comments of once they had
implemented this they knew that this was
something going forward that they would
stay with that it had been beneficial to
their school districts I think they gave
a lot of information
yeah
thank you and I is it okay to do a
little recap of that um
research that I did yes please and just
let the people know it is up under the
agenda the survey the second survey that
um that was run by the curriculum slash
or not curriculum but the calendar
um the calendar committee the calendar
for Day committee is actually up on the
up on the website as well as on her
agenda as well as this report and what I
ended up doing is reaching out to a
total of
four five six
six different trustees from six
different districts around the state
they were all in the 3A League they were
basically the same size as we are they
were different regions around the state
and I asked them 11 different questions
and they range from when they started
from 2006 all the way to this last this
year and I think some of the things that
I mean I guess would say come out of
that is that once you go into it even
um they went into it number of them went
into it for retention of teachers and
there was when they did the surveys
there was definitely more
a greater percentage that wanted to go
into four day when I look at our survey
results we're kind of split one-third
one-third one-third almost of who wants
to go who's undecided and
um who is against it they had on the
fifth I did ask about the fifth day what
they did they did on the professional
development they also work they had
concerns about the elementary school
kids going home so our kids going home
without food because of the food
security issues they did some of them
did send kids home with a knapsack some
of this some of the school districts had
a weekly
Fridays were a weekly study hall and I
think they did that as if you know gave
extra money um compensated staff for
doing that
it did not there was not a plus or a
minus for student performance you'll see
on my report I linked each of the school
districts I talked with to their report
card I mean it was all across it was
basically very close to the same it was
you know I look at it and it was
we were all about the same in terms of
performances on whether they would be
our test scores or performance measures
so there wasn't really any gain I think
what they saw was the retention of
teachers facilities or Transportation
savings there might be some
um but for us if we run our school
school facilities 24 7 we really don't
have that same savings our savings for
four days two to four percent what they
were seeing is the savings is two to
four percent not what they were seeing
um
again it was retention of teachers
um was a big one there were people
definitely concerned with the long days
for the younger especially the younger
kids
um
and that was the longer days
um you know that was a problem I also
asked about transportation and who had
the same geographic area as we did
nobody had an hour and a half or more
and that was my consideration because
I'm my zone is Zone one and it is up to
Priest Lake those kids are on the bus
for an hour and a half
so that gives me great pause on it but
that is something I asked nobody had the
same all these kids to not you know
nobody was the length that we have
um
what else snacks in the afternoon
um extra you know if the students needed
extra assistance they were got engaging
that
um a number of the districts a handful
of the districts I should say went back
and after a a year or two went back and
surveyed and basically they got higher
percentage that people did like four day
we also talked about the Competitive
Edge of four day I mean we look at this
is one thing we look at four day in the
retention of teachers
but
um so many of the school districts are
going with four days so the Competitive
Edge is not
the Competitive Edge is four days is not
the Panacea it used to be
um and then the other thing is I did
talk to McCall School District that was
surrounded by four day and I wanted to
know why they didn't go four-day they
were still on five day and the reason
that they gave is the teacher the chair
that I talked with there said that
um
she's came from elementary school she
was administrator and now she might have
been a superintendent at one point but
she's now in the chair and she said
luckily McCall has the money to keep pay
their staff correctly and so that they
don't have to go they've got ample
funding and they can pay people and she
wouldn't she's not seeing the data for
student performance so that's why
they're not going even though they're
surrounded by it
um
so I did ask her what do you think about
extending the number of days versus the
hours and that perked her up a little
bit she thought that was of interest
um so rather than adding more to adding
more hours but our survey is contrary to
that the survey results that were done
by the um the committee um the calendar
committee and the four day committee
kind of show that people weren't as
excited about extending the number of
days as they were the number of hours
but it could be you know if a kid leaves
here and you add 55 minutes to the day
when you get home up north and it's hour
and a half to two hours depending on the
road that could be a very long day so
there it is online
um I spent a lot of time trying to
figure out who exactly to talk to I had
three others I would have liked to have
talked to with
um but I didn't they didn't get back in
touch with me so a small sample but
that's what I got thank you any other
comments
what was the percentage
you said about third
a third strike pretty much I think that
was the last survey that I saw
I mean I think in these other school
districts the teachers pushed it you
know wanted the four day but in some
ways we brought it forward so it's a
little different in that to look at it
for retention but
um that's you know that was part of it
okay any other questions
part of our concern initially too was
um because of the expenditures to a
district and in looking at four days
what would that
you know dollar how would that affect it
to
you know our bottom line and they said
pretty much across the board it wasn't
the savings that they thought it was it
was two to four percent and that's what
the research is coming up with like ran
I posted on the one pager with research
there
um and Rand looked at
um the Rand research actually did look
out it's a lengthy it's a lengthy study
five states four day that are going four
days they looked at Food security social
economic issues they looked at
performance
um tiredness of students
ironically which I was sort of surprised
they found that four days the kids were
actually sleeping on the fifth day and
catching up on sleep
yeah you know that was sort of an
interest
we brought up
but that's
um
and some of them I asked how long it
took them the one of the people I asked
in Weezer who was a new school board
member and she voted against him that's
why I called her or got hold of her it
was too fast she came on the board in
you know January last year and they made
a decision by April and she thought that
was too fast others did go through
Community surveys did go through teacher
surveys did go through Community forums
and some of these things we've you know
done
um
but and that was again I think it was
the long days
the for the youngers making sure the
kids have maybe food who are don't have
that
um that issue you know that might be an
issue for kids when they get home and
then
um
again what happens to those kids on the
four day you know on the fifth day if um
you know their home situation is not as
maybe as stable as some of the others
so
okay and uh no more no other questions
um the motion on the floor is to
um do we accept a four day work week and
that's the only thing we're deciding how
we implement the calendar is another
decision so do I hear a motion on the
floor to accept or to vote on four day
week
okay
all those in favor say aye
oh we need a second oh I'm sorry second
okay so the motion on floor is the
um for the four day week all those in
favor say aye
aye
there's a post
nay
okay so it's the motion carries four to
one
um the calendar committee will determine
the length of the school year
thank you
so
at all
communities
we appreciate it
all right
next on the agenda is uh
policy first meeting
you need a motion to bring it to the
floor
yes
okay we bring it to the floor first and
we make a motion
okay
quiet please
okay just uh by Sherman Brown makes a
motion to bring it to the floor trusty
rhyme bolt seconds it
[Music]
um okay there's a motion on the floor to
table
can we
we need a second right yes I'll second
okay I needed
if you put these off again there still
need to be taken care of I agree and I'm
I think they're very quick I chose
initially when I put this agenda
together I chose the ones that should
have been the simplest to go through
um and so that's my two cents on that
okay
okay could I could I make a
recommendation
um that we that we do a
a um
what do you call a synopsis or a a brief
summary of a change where the change
came from
uh why we're changing it
whether it's uh whether it's a
um
a rule change or or legislative change
or a procedure change in the district
or we're fixing an error
would you like me to run through or
something see if I could do that
um
by do we have it ready by next meeting
sorry in the summary
um okay I mean it's already in the
summary that was provided by us to us by
isba they gave us a quick summary
um what I put in here and it could just
be maybe this is maybe I could re amend
the budget or men amend the motion to
say that um
that we only look at the isba
policies with their changes and use
those as the ones that we look at and
then react to and make changes to versus
the comparison between ours in isbas
maybe that will be shorter than trying
to do this because right now why the
packet was longer was that
was the fact that
um the there's both the isba changes and
then afterwards is what was our existing
policy
okay I understand
um but
um what we could do there's a motion on
the floor to table this till next
meeting
could we have the brief summary
um next meeting and um just let you know
there's like five or six others you've
got Library materials curricular
materials still on the board I would
make them I would again amend that and
say that it would probably be best is to
do a work session for these policies
maybe before the next meeting put on the
table a work session to go through these
policies and the curricular ones the
library materials selection of Library
materials curricular materials Learning
Materials there's a whole section that
is not been addressed yet okay perfect
um
all those in favor of okay the the
amendment or the motion on the table is
to table this and move it to a working
session with the other with the other
colleagues policies that we have not
considered yet
okay all those in favor say aye aye
those opposed okay the motion carries
do we want to set a date now or or later
um what we have done in the past put the
work session before the next board
meeting okay monthly meeting I would
suggest maybe making a little bit more
than an hour maybe making instead of
five making it 4 30 or 4 and then being
able to have a break because there's
quite a packet and it'd be good to get
through because then there's going to be
a spring there's going to be spring
policy okay
[Music]
that date would also
think that the boardwalk session
specifically is okay
I think that maybe we should have all of
these policies on a different day okay
um just because we have so many to get
through and Wednesdays are a really long
day okay so do do we want to make
another work session we want to keep the
finance work session
uh prior to the 15th the February 15th
board meeting so it would be a work it
would be a budget session right budget
what you would call it is a budget
budget Workshop okay
so we do a finance work session on the
15th what day of the week would be good
for policy review
Workshop
February 7th
a Tuesday let me see
that works for me I can I think that
works that looks like it's a good time
does that work for you uh
I suggest you well no no I'm stopping
here
well will four o'clock work on the
seventh
[Music]
clock it is
okay on the seventh yes
and then the 15 on the
um before the board meeting we will have
a finance work session or whatever we're
calling it yes
um
are we scheduling on the 7th for two
hours I
would think even the packet that if
we're looking if you want to look at
everything that's we've put on hold
because it's the library materials the
curriculum materials I mean it's
basically there's a bunch of things that
and it would be basically we can't make
any decisions
a work session is not a decision-making
session just going through the policy so
we understand and then we could put it
on the then we could put it
okay then we can put it on for the next
agenda okay okay let's go with that
okay okay
are we clear on that
we're okay
February 7th yes okay
okay
next on the agenda
is uh comments from the audience that
that are non-agenda items the first one
up is John Wyatt
okay
um
Ann welder welder Chamberlain
I'm very disappointed
me because I wanted to thank you that
presentation by Quantum learning and
classical education and I was really
hoping to create
responsible registrations it was so
impressive
side views we pursue
so that we can graduate
and just with an education
so I don't know where we're going to be
able to go with them at this point
um I think that kids coming in I think
there was some clarity about one of the
comments which was what are we going to
do
seven through she's 12th graders about
kids to come into the district but the
dance teacher I know that
when you when we introduce kids three
quarters away from the dance program the
kids that already know the dance bring
those kids to their level I've seen kids
come in to fourth grade which is a a
dance and it's a routine with eight
moves and they change partners and I've
seen girls come in a week prior to the
performance and were able to perform
because the other kids that are there
and are already doing it you know it's a
peer pressure thing really
um but but and we'll be able to get
those kids coming into the district
they'll catch right on if everybody's
doing it at the meeting last week that I
was so impressed with he said that the
reason why he didn't start with seventh
and eighth graders is because they
worked brought in from the beginning I
teach second graders how to do partner
dancing so that by the time they get to
sixth grade they they are already used
to it okay you can't accept the
exception of Idaho Hill you can't just
drop partner dancing in on sixth graders
they won't do it but Idaho has students
but that's because they thought Mrs
McMahon do it and so they wanted to
talk anyway
um I I am hoping that maybe some way we
can figure out how to bring this
classical education into a totally
impressed
the presentation
thank you so much
next up is Rick Kramer
to see well I think she's seeing if you
see
right
not how about Jennifer Kramer
oh okay
is that it
um I don't know if she's gone okay and
if she we can plan
Leanne
all right Highway
okay okay they're gone
and then you would I would ask for any
if there are any other people yes are
there any other people who want to speak
yes please
um just because somebody says you cannot
do a classical education over four days
to see it can't be done
the world was founded upon doing things
beyond what we are told can be done
so if we have a will
whatever we choose to do
is it to hand be done
we just have to make a decision
what it is that we want
and find a way to implement it I've seen
the survey that Margaret spent so much
time doing and so thank you very much
for doing that and I love that
processed it you've gotten a little p
ring figuring out what the heck it was
all about and realized
because the the student retention didn't
then you could very easily
Implement a curriculum I'm a retired
teacher I spent elementary junior high
high school there isn't any way that you
can't make the schedule work for every
grade or important thing there has to be
compromises we have to do what's best
for everybody in the district and I
truly believe that we can bring a
different curriculum four days I don't
care what Steve Weinberg said just
because someone else hasn't done it
doesn't mean
thank you
any other comments
okay uh board reflection and Roundtable
discussion
uh draft strategic plan
I guess that was only there just in case
we needed to follow up with what
Jackie's presentation again Jackie when
is the it's January 27th you're at the
high school right at what time
eight eight okay and
okay
seventh we just decided was a Tuesday
eighth I think is a
and then are you hoping that the board
is going to um
approve it with the budget
in February is that what your hope is
okay okay
um
okay
any other comments about the Strategic
plan
okay
um board committee monthly special
meetings we already talked about a
couple work sessions uh do we want to
discuss the committee meeting do we want
to wait till later
I guess I'm wondering about negotiations
and confer and meet
um that probably has to wait till the
budget kind of gets hammered out a
little bit and I think it's Wilma at
least on the negotiations for this
certified needs to probably she may need
to contact us and you know there's a
given a take I
like
um so we'll flesh that out the
Committees and figure out the meetings
for those we typically on the facilities
um uh you can sets those up the monthly
meetings we've already talked about
special meetings we've already talked
about in the work session so that's it
need a motion to adjourn
ing okay a second okay all those in
favor
meeting adjourned thank you